In this video, we will use logistic regression to see if we can identify MLP neurons that are tuned
to proper nouns.
A proper noun is a particular person, place, or thing.
So for example, the word city is a noun, but Bucharest is a proper noun because it's referring to
one particular city.
Likewise, the word instructor is a noun because that's a person.
But Mike is a proper noun because that refers to a particular instructor.
In English, proper nouns start with capital letters, which makes them fairly easy to identify in text.
And so I'll also show you a very simple algorithm to identify proper nouns in tokenized text.
All of the theory and explanation of the analyses.
I've already covered a few videos ago, so I will start immediately with the overview of the Python
demo.
I will begin in Python by importing GPT two medium and implanting hooks to get the activations from
all of the MLP expansion layers.
And actually, in the demo, I'm only going to be analyzing data from one layer, but having hooks in
all the layers will give you the opportunity to explore the code further.
And we're also going to look at all of the layers in the code challenge in the next video.
I will then import some data from the wiki text dataset, and I'll show you a very simple algorithm
that I used to identify proper nouns.
Now, of the around 11,000 tokens that I imported there happen to be a little bit over 1000 proper nouns.
On the one hand, that is relatively high, but given that this is a Wikipedia data set, there are
actually a lot of proper nouns in Wikipedia articles.
Here you see a couple of examples of the proper nouns that I identified.
Now, you might think that there are some mistakes, some accidents in here because words like the and
court, for example, these are not necessarily proper nouns.
But actually when I show you these tokens in context, you will see that they really are.
For example, the is not the start of a sentence, but instead is part of a title.
I think it was the title of a play anyway.
Next I will set up and run a logistic regression on one neuron, just to show you a reminder of how
to set up the regression and how to interpret the regression table.
In particular, what we are looking for is the beta coefficient of the term that is not the constant.
So this value over here and also its statistical significance which is this p value over here.
So this is just one neuron.
But there are many thousands of neurons in this MLP layer.
So therefore I will repeat the logistic regression without showing the whole table for all of the neurons
in this particular transformer block and show you a visualization that looks like this.
So here you see all of the beta values on the y axis for all 4000 neurons on the x axis.
And I have labeled and colored them according to whether they have a subthreshold or a supra threshold
p value.
And I corrected for multiple comparisons using the Bonferroni method.
And what you see over here in this plot is a scatter plot of the beta coefficients on the x axis by
the p values on the y axis.
It's a pretty neat plot.
It's pretty nice to look at, and basically what it shows is that the significant coefficients have
smaller p values.
Now what is the interpretation of these results?
Remember that the regression here was set up to look for proper nouns versus other tokens that are not
proper nouns.
So positive beta values over here correspond to neurons that have stronger activations for proper nouns.
On the other hand, the negative coefficients the negative betas are a little bit more difficult to
interpret.
All of the comparison tokens are mixed across many different parts of speech.
So basically this just means that these neurons here have very small activations to proper nouns compared
to a variety of other tokens.
Now, as you might know, I am a former neuroscience professor and I really dislike drawing comparisons
between biological brains and deep learning models because they are really nothing whatsoever alike.
That said, you do see a lot, very often in real biological brains that many neurons show category
selectivity and also important computations by suppressing their firing, not only increasing their
firing.
But anyway, other than this visualization, we're not really going to focus on the negative beta values.
Anyway, so this is a quantitative Analysis.
To do a qualitative analysis, I will create a text heatmap with the activation coming from the neuron
that had the largest beta value.
I'll have more to say about this when I switch to code, but you do see that this neuron gives strong
activations for proper nouns.
Now, not exclusively.
This neuron does also seem to like the word television, for example, but certainly there is some preference
for proper nouns.
Now these tokens here that I'm showing here, these are literally the tokens that I ran the analysis
on.
So that means that all of these qualitative results, this text heatmap, while compelling, could actually
be due to overfitting the training data.
So therefore I will then do an out-of-sample qualitative assessment by generating this a similar text
heatmap, but from a different batch of text that the logistic regression was not trained on.
I will show those results at the end of the Python demo.
So now let's switch to code and work our way up to that point.
Here is the code to update the Hugging Face datasets library, which I've already done and restarted
the session so I don't need to do it again.
So here loading in some standard libraries, including Statsmodels to run the logistic regression.
Here I'm importing Gpt2 medium.
So it's going to be a little bit bigger.
More parameters than the GPT two small model that we often work with.
Here I have the code set up to run the GPU, although I'm actually not running.
I'm not using the GPU, so I'm going to run this entire code file on the CPU, which is totally fine
because we're not doing that much intensive processing of this model.
but I have the code here.
I don't know, just in case you would like to.
Use it.
Run it on the GPU.
Okay, so let's see.
This is just a reminder of the architecture.
Here we have 24 transformer blocks.
The embeddings dimension is 1024.
So it's not enormously bigger than the small version of GPT two but it is considerably bigger.
It is.
Yeah, it's quite a bit bigger.
Anyway here in the MLP.
Uh subblock of the transformer layers, we have 4000 neurons in the expansion layer, compared to 3000
in the uh, for GPT two small here.
This is code you've seen before.
I'm implanting a hook in all of the layers.
So MLP and then in the C FC for uh fully connected layer.
And this for loop allows me to implant this hook into every single layer.
As I mentioned, I'm actually in this Python demo only using the data from one layer, but you can switch
and look at other layers.
Okay, here is where I'm importing some data.
In the first 200 samples from this data set we got 11,000 tokens.
And what is all this code do.
So a lot of this code let me show you this.
So text and then I can show you this.
First of all this you've seen before the organization of this data set.
So we can look at texts.
Let's just look at the first element.
You can see this is actually empty right.
So I want to ignore that.
So you could say if the length of this little stream of text is greater than one, then we can start
tokenizing it and working with it.
But there's also other snippets of text here that are really short.
I think these are just titles or something or subsections.
Not sure what these correspond to, but they are very short.
There's quite a few of these.
I am really more interested in having longer streams of text like this one.
So that is why I have this little conditional here where I basically just say, if this is more than
50 characters, then we tokenize the text and add them or concatenate them onto this vector of tokens.
And why 50?
That's really arbitrary.
You could make it be 48.
You can make it be 148 characters.
You know, this is not a real, theoretically motivated, mathematically precise parameter that I picked
here.
Okay.
Anyway, so that's the text that gives us 11,000 tokens.
Here is just an example of how I'm going to find proper nouns.
So as I mentioned in the beginning of this video in written English, proper nouns always start with
capital letters, and we also know that tokens in gpt2 often start with spaces.
So here I use uh.
So this is just an example.
We could have a token that is the MC.
Uh, and then I strip it to remove the space.
And then I look at the first letter after removing the space.
And then I want to know, is this an uppercase letter?
Now, the thing is that this is also true for words like, uh, you know, when you start a sentence,
the start of the sentence is also going to say true over here.
So therefore we need to have some additional conditionals to test for proper nouns.
And that's what I set up in this very simple algorithm.
I just want to highlight there are other ways.
In fact, there are libraries that you can use to identify parts of speech, like the Spacy library.
I'll introduce that later in the course.
For now, for the purposes of this video, I just want to have a nice, simple, straightforward algorithm.
It could have some false positives and false negatives.
Totally fine for the purpose of this video.
Okay, let's see how this works.
Okay.
So we're looping over the tokens.
And then here I'm just decoding this particular token.
And then we can actually just ignore all of the really short tokens.
And then I set up these two conditionals here.
So the first conditional is that this token the first letter when you strip away the text must be uppercase.
Exactly what I showed in the previous code cell.
And the previous token needs cannot end with a period or an exclamation point or anything like this.
So if the previous token ends in a period, then we would know that this is the start of a sentence,
and this is not actually a proper noun, by the way, this is also going to exclude cases where the
sentence does in fact start with a proper noun.
So there's going to be a couple of false negatives that we will lose here.
But that's fine.
In general, with these kinds of analyses, it's better to lose a couple of tokens that you might want
to include, then to include tokens that do not actually belong in the analysis.
Okay, so super simple.
Then I say if both of these conditions are true, I am going to consider this token to be a proper noun.
So there we go.
And now here.
Yeah.
Just to show some examples, these are some of the proper nouns.
This code here is just to show some of these tokens in context.
So here I have this variable w.
It's just where we have these proper nouns.
Actually let me make sure this is really clear.
So we have tokens, right?
These are all the tokens that we have in the text that I've extracted.
And then I have another variable that I've created is proper noun.
And this is all zeros and ones.
And this is telling me whether each token is not a proper noun.
It could be any other part of speech.
It could be a number.
Uh, or if this is a one, then this is going to be a proper noun.
Then the token corresponds to a proper noun.
Okay, so here I'm just finding all of the proper nouns and then printing out some of these proper nouns.
Okay.
So now this is taken without any context.
That's just the token itself.
What I'm doing here is just grabbing the surrounding tokens just five before and five tokens after,
just to decode them so we can see what it looks like.
So so the token here and this is the fourth token.
So that is one, two, three, four.
It looks like it's her, but it's actually the word heron.
So starring role in the play herons written by Simon.
And that's probably the next proper noun over here.
So now we see here as written by Simon Stevenson and so on.
So now we can go back and look at this funny looking one here, this example the so the is generally
not a proper noun, but here it happens to be so the role in the television series the bill.
So in this case the goes with Bill.
It's capitalized and it's referring to this particular bill.
Now again you know, we could have a formal linguistics debate about whether we want to include this.
If you were doing this kind of research for publication, then these are the kinds of nuanced but important
issues that you would want to work with.
I am just teaching you about the method, so I'm comfortable leaving it as it is.
Okay, so now I'm going to run a forward pass through the model.
I'm not actually pushing all of the tokens through the model.
I'm only going to test the first 1000 tokens out of the 12,000 that I extracted.
So you can see this is taking, I don't know, 30s maybe it will take a minute.
If you were attached to the GPU, this line would take three seconds maybe, but now it is.
Yeah, 25 seconds.
That's basically the only thing you would want to connect to the GPT to the GPU for is to save 20s.
So anyway, uh, here, this just confirms that we do get all of the MLP layers in this activations
variable in this dictionary.
And if we look at the size of one of them, that is one by 1024 by 4096, corresponding to one batch,
so one sequence of 1024 tokens, and there are 4096 neurons in the expansion layer of the MLP.
That is just for MLP from Transformer block 21.
But of course this would look the same for all of the transformer blocks.
All right.
Here I'm getting a variable that tells me exactly that number over here.
Okay.
So now I'm going to set up the logistic regression first just in one neuron.
Actually I'll talk about this code a bit.
I'm not going to talk about this code because that is exactly the same code that you saw in a couple
of videos ago, and also the previous video for running logistic regression.
So I showed you above that there were around 1200 proper nouns in total in the entire data set, but
I did not actually process the entire data set up here.
I only processed the first 1000 tokens.
So now I need to find all of the tokens that are just in that first batch.
And that is there's 200 proper nouns in that first batch of tokens.
So what I want to do now is find the locations of all of those proper nouns, and then also find an
equal sample size of non-proper nouns to use as a reference.
And that is the point of this code here.
So here I'm finding where all the proper nouns are.
That's exactly what I showed you here.
And now here I'm getting comparison tokens.
So the idea is that I'm just looping through all of the sequence lengths.
So looping through the integers up to 1023, and then I'm counting them if they are not in the proper
nouns.
So any of the tokens, or I should say, yeah, all of the tokens except for the proper nouns are going
into this array here, this vector over here.
So that means that this is going to be 200.
So we'll have 219 proper nouns and 800 comparison tokens.
But that will give us really unequal sample sizes which is not optimal.
So what I'm doing here is shuffling them so that instead of being an order, they're just randomly shuffled.
And then I'm just selecting the first 219.
So what that means is that we have 219 proper nouns.
And uh, we should also have comparison tokens.
We should also have 219 comparison tokens.
Okay.
So that is how we define the labels and the tokens that we want.
Yeah.
And then I'm building up this model over here.
And here you see the results.
So for this particular neuron just one randomly selected neuron from one randomly selected transformer
block we see that the coefficient is negative.
So that means that there and the p value is less than 0.05.
So that means that this neuron had significantly weaker activation in proper nouns compared to all of
the mixture of other tokens.
Now, one final thing I would like to say about this analysis is that if you really wanted to test for
proper noun selectivity, it would also be relevant to break up the data in the tokens into different
parts of speech categories.
So you want to know the relationship between activations in proper nouns, but also in regular non-proper
nouns, in verbs and adjectives and adverbs and parts of speech in numbers, uh, in, you know, HTML
tags and Python code and so on.
But I'm going to keep it simple here in this video.
So now that we know how to set up a linear classifier for one neuron and extract the beta value and
p value from that classifier result, I am now going to have a for loop over all of the neurons in one
layer.
So I'm just picking layer 18.
Remember this actually corresponds to the 19th transformer block because we start counting at zero.
And then within this one layer I'm just looping over all of the neurons.
Uh, here I'm building up the data here I run the logistic regression analysis and then grabbing the
p value and the beta value.
Okay.
Very good.
And the rest of this stuff you have seen before uh, in a couple of videos ago.
So I'm not going to talk about this a whole lot.
Um, here I'm getting the maximum beta value.
So which neuron has the largest beta value?
And that is uh, neuron uh, 2979.
So that is this one over here.
This one is the largest.
This one's also quite strong.
So we probably also get some good selectivity or at least tuning uh, in this neuron as well.
But this one happens to be by numerical value, the largest one.
Okay.
So after that now I'm going to, uh, min max scale the activations.
Uh, I'm also actually scaling the largest, uh, or most extreme negative value here.
I'm not really going to look at that further, but the code is here.
In case you are curious to explore what the qualitative interpretation would be for this neuron here.
Okay, this code here just finds the size, the width of the of a letter in a plot.
You've seen this code before.
And now here I'm plotting.
So I'm plotting for the letters.
And you can see that the face color.
So the color of the patch behind each token comes from the positive activations.
Uh, and, uh, yeah, here I am, just squaring it just to make it, uh, make the color a little bit
more extreme.
So it's a little bit easier to visually recognize.
Okay.
So what do we see here.
We see strong activations for the long firm.
Mark Ravenhill uh bolter Philip uh London Borough daylight robbery.
This is the title of a film and lots of other stuff.
It's not only activating for proper nouns, right?
So here we also have a pretty respectable amount of activation for the number 2000.
Here is let's see also other years.
It's activating for years it's activating for the word episode the word the and television right.
So it's not selective.
It's not that this neuron is only firing for proper nouns and nothing else.
But it does seem to be fairly consistently responding more so, more strong, stronger activation for,
uh, proper nouns compared to other tokens in general.
Okay.
And then as I mentioned in the slides, these are the exact data that I trained on.
So in fact I am evaluating based on the training data.
That's always the best first step.
You always want to see whether the results look good in your training data.
If they don't look good in the training data, then maybe something went wrong.
Or maybe you just don't have a real robust effect, but you always want to evaluate the results in an
out-of-sample.
So a validation set or a test set.
And that is what I do here.
So now I'm pushing other tokens through the model.
It's the same tokens that we extracted in the beginning of the code file.
But uh, before I was processing these tokens.
So from the beginning up to 1024, now I'm processing 1024 up to 2047.
So this is the next batch of data, the next sequence of 1000 tokens.
And now I am grabbing the activations from the same layer and the same exact neuron that we identified
before, but now this is for the new activations from the next batch, the next segment of tokens.
Notice what's missing in the code.
Here is the logistic regression analysis.
I'm not doing another analysis.
I'm taking the neuron that we identified from the previous analysis and applying that result to a new
set of data points.
So out-of-sample testing.
Okay.
So, uh, run this so grab these activations, uh, min max scale those activations.
And then here I'm creating the, uh, text again.
So the heat map, most of this code is exactly the same as what you saw above.
The main difference is here I'm adding sequence length to the tokens.
So now this is for the next batch of tokens.
And now we can see this is the real test.
So we want to see do we see darker colors for proper nouns compared to any other type of word?
So here we have Shakespeare.
Uh, Hugo.
Uh, Levi here is dead, but this is Waking the Dead.
So television series, uh, Jimmy Darden.
Let's see what else we got.
Uh, Wordsworth?
Uh, yeah.
So, you know, uh, William Hung, uh, but we also see some pretty strong activation for, like,
concise and the O in omitting other words like ending and advisors and set a period.
So this is not quite as compelling as in the training set, but, uh, you know, this is very qualitative.
I'm not doing any quantitative analysis here.
Qualitatively, it does seem like there is still some tuning, some preference in this neuron for proper
nouns.
Again, that's pretty good.
But it's not like super duper amazingly compelling.
On the other hand, I would like to stress that I just ran this analysis in a very small sample and
a very limited data set.
So if you are doing this kind of analysis for real, basically, you know, all the code here is fine,
but you would want to use a ton more data.
You would want to use a lot more tokens, thousands of tokens, tens of thousands of tokens, and not
just a couple of dozen tokens.
The concepts and code that you learned about in this video are going to appear several more times over
the next few sections, including in the code challenge in the next video.
This second point is that visualization is so important for understanding patterns in data, and also
identifying possible problems that might arise in the code or in the analyses.